# Ricardian contracts: a proposed integration

While the self sovereign organization is intended to alleviate the need for collaborating individuals to rely on traditional legal and business structures and services such as corporate entities, bank accounts etc, the most versatile implementation of the concept will utilize both existent and emergent structures to transparently, justly and legally manage financial and informational assets. This combination of existent (i.e. traditional or legal or prose) contracts and emergent (i.e. smart) contracts is referred to as a Ricardian contract, in which the legal contract refers to smart contracts deployed on a blockchain, thereby creating a system that is both legally (in a court) and objectively (in code) binding. Although some blockchain utopianists may claim that this flouts the spirit and opportunity of the move towards decentralization, we believe that smart contracts will be adopted most quickly and effectively if they are designed to complement existing legal and corporate structures rather than replace them. For this reason, we have sought to incorporate Ricardian contracts into our project.

  While the potential complexity of such legal / smart contract structures cannot be overstated, we have decided to automate the generation of a legal contract upon deployment of our simple prototype organization. Our ` ProjectFactory` contract is utilized to create new instances of the `Project` contract by passing in the (relatively narrow) set of parameters we identified as required for a minimum viable product. These include the project purpose, registered project participants (legal name and wallet address), initiation requirements (signatures and / or threshold investments from a threshold number of participants), and a space to store informational assets (in this case, a Github account; in future, some IPFS or other content-addressed similar implementation). More sophisticated implementations will allow for configuration of decision-making rules (i.e. quorum vs simple majority vs supermajority, etc), arbitration processes and so forth. Importantly, each of these parameters passed into the invocation of `createProject()` function, included in the `ProjectFactory`  contract definition *can be quite easily converted into legal prose*. That is to say, we envision that the `createProject()` function returns that project's contract address, which can then be used (along with the parameters passed into `createProject()`) to create a legal contract for project participants to sign. This will all be done on the client. Project deployment will yield an uninitiated instance of the `Project` contract on the blockchain AND a legal contract referring to that specific contract address.

  The automatic generation of the legal component of the Ricardian contract will only be possible within project deployments generated from a narrow band of parameters. More sophisticated, custom implementations of the scheme will require lawyers to work alongside smart contract developers to ensure that a valid custom Ricardian contract is created. This said, we expect that it will typically be much easier to generate a legal contract from Solidity code than the other way around - we anticipate that a best practice will be to involve lawyers perhaps at the early design phase, but really after contracts have been thoroughly tested and are ready for deployment, so developers don't make changes that render legal contracts invalid.

  Further, we recommend that the ABI be included in the legal contract so all functions and contract attributes are preserved in one document.

  HERE IS A SMALL EXTENSION TO THE RESEARCH
